1. Introduction
Suppose that pat is a string of length patlen and we
wish to find the position i of the leftmost character in
Programming G. Manacher, S.L. Graham the first occurrence of pat in some string string:
Techniques Editors pat: AT-THAT
A Fast String string: ... WHICH-FINALLY-HALTS.--AT-THAT-POINT ...
Searching Algorithm The obvious search algorithm considers each character
position of string and determines whether the succes-
sive patlen characters of string starting at that position
Robert S. Boyer match the successive patlen characters of pat. Knuth,
Stanford Research Institute Morris, and Pratt [4] have observed that this algorithm
is quadratic. That is, in the worst case, the number of
J Strother Moore
comparisons is on the order of i * patlen.l
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
Knuth, Morris, and Pratt have described a linear
search algorithm which preprocesses pat in time linear
in patlen and then searches string in time linear in i +
An algorithm is presented that searches for the patlen. In particular, their algorithm inspects each of
location, "i," of the first occurrence of a character the first i + patlen - 1 characters of string precisely
string, "'pat,'" in another string, "string." During the once.
search operation, the characters of pat are matched We now present a search algorithm which is usually
starting with the last character of pat. The information "sublinear": It may not inspect each of the first i +
gained by starting the match at the end of the pattern patlen - 1 characters of string. By "usually sublinear"
often allows the algorithm to proceed in large jumps we mean that the expected value of the number of
through the text being searched. Thus the algorithm inspected characters in string is c * (i + patlen), where
has the unusual property that, in most cases, not all of c < 1 and gets smaller as patlen increases. There are
the first i characters of string are inspected. The patterns and strings for which worse behavior is ex-
number of characters actually inspected (on the aver- hibited. However, Knuth, in [5], has shown that the
age) decreases as a function of the length of pat. For a algorithm is linear even in the worst case.
random English pattern of length 5, the algorithm will The actual number of characters inspected depends
typically inspect i/4 characters of string before finding on statistical properties of the characters in pat and
a match at i. Furthermore, the algorithm has been string. However, since the number of characters in-
implemented so that (on the average) fewer than i + spected on the average decreases as patlen increases,
patlen machine instructions are executed. These con- our algorithm actually speeds up on longer patterns.
clusions are supported with empirical evidence and a Furthermore, the algorithm is sublinear in another
theoretical analysis of the average behavior of the sense: It has been implemented so that on the average
algorithm. The worst case behavior of the algorithm is it requires the execution of fewer than i + patlen
linear in i + patlen, assuming the availability of array machine instructions per search.
space for tables linear in patlen plus the size of the The organization of this paper is as follows: In the
alphabet. next two sections we give an informal description of
Key Words and Phrases: bibliographic search, com- the algorithm and show an example of how it works.
putational complexity, information retrieval, linear We then define the algorithm precisely and discuss its
time bound, pattern matching, text editing efficient implementation. After this discussion we pres-
CR Categories: 3.74, 4.40, 5.25 ent the results of a thorough test of a particular
machine code implementation of our algorithm. We
compare these results to similar results for the Knuth,
Morris, and Pratt algorithm and the simple search
algorithm. Following this empirical evidence is a theo-
Copyright © 1977, Association for Computing Machinery, Inc.
retical analysis which accurately predicts the perform-
General permission to republish, but not for profit, all or part of
this material is granted provided that ACM's copyright notice is ance measured. Next we describe some situations in
given and that reference is made to the publication, to its date of which it may not be advantageous to use our algorithm.
issue, and to the fact that reprinting privileges were granted by per-
We conclude with a discussion of the history of our
mission of the Association for Computing Machinery.
Authors' present addresses: R.S. Boyer, Computer Science algorithm.
Laboratory, Stanford Research Institute, Menlo Park, CA 94025.
This work was partially supported by ONR Contract N00014-75-C- 1 The quadratic nature of this algorithm appears when initial
0816; JS. Moore was in the Computer Science Laboratory, Xerox substrings of pat occur often in string. Because this is a relatively
Palo Alto Research Center, Palo Alto, CA 94304, when this work rare phenomenon in string searches over English text, this simple
was done. His current address is Computer Science Laboratory, SRI algorithm is practically linear in i + patlen and therefore acceptable
International, Menlo Park, CA 94025. for most applications.
762 Communications October 1977
of Volume 20
the ACM Number 10
2. Informal Description pat is to the left of the mismatch, we can slide forward
by k = deltal(char) - rn to align the two occurrences
The basic idea behind the algorithm is that more
of char. This shifts our attention down string by
information is gained by matching the pattern from
deltal(char) - m + m = deltas(char).
the right than from the left. Imagine that pat is placed
However, it is possible that we can do better than
on top of the left-hand end of string so that the first
this.
characters of the two strings are aligned. Consider
Observation 3(b). We know that the next m char-
what we learn if we fetch the patlenth character, char,
acters of string match the final m characters of pat. Let
of string. This is the character which is aligned with
this substring of pat be subpat. We also know that this
the last character of pat.
occurrence ofsubpat instring is preceded by a character
Observation 1. If char is known not to occur in pat,
(char) which is different from the character preceding
then we know we need not consider the possibility of
the terminal occurrence of subpat in pat. Roughly
an occurrence of pat starting at string positions 1, 2,
speaking, we can generalize the kind of reasoning used
• . . or patlen: Such an occurrence would require that
above and slide pat down by some amount so that the
char be a character of pat.
discovered occurrence of subpat in string is aligned
Observation 2. More generally, if the last (right-
with the rightmost occurrence of subpat in pat which is
most) occurrence of char in pat is deltal characters
not preceded by the character preceding its terminal
from the right end of pat, then we know we can slide
occurrence in pat. We call such a reoccurrence of
pat down delta~ positions without checking for matches.
subpat in pat a "plausible reoccurrence." The reason
The reason is that if we were to move pat by less than
we said "roughly speaking" above is that we must
deltas, the occurrence of char in string would be aligned
allow for the rightmost plausible reoccurrence ofsubpat
with some character it could not possibly match: Such
to "fall off" the left end of pat. This is made precise
a match would require an occurrence of char in pat to
later.
the right of the rightmost.
Therefore, according to Observation 3(b), if we
Therefore unless char matches the last character of
have matched the last m characters of pat before
pat we can move past delta1 characters of string with-
finding a mismatch, we can move pat down by k
out looking at the characters skipped; delta~ is a
characters, where k is based on the position in pat of
function of the character char obtained from string. If
the rightmost plausible reoccurrence of the terminal
char does not occur in pat, delta~ is patlen. If char does
substring of pat having m characters. After sliding
occur in pat, delta~ is the difference between patlen
down by k, we want to inspect the character of string
and the position of the rightmost occurrence of char in
aligned with the last character of pat. Thus we actually
pat.
shift our attention down string by k + rn characters.
Now suppose that char matches the last character
We call this distance deltaz, and we define deltaz as a
of pat. Then we must determine whether the previous
function of the position ] in pat at which the mismatch
character in string matches the second from the last
occurred, k is just the distance between the terminal
character in pat. If so, we continue backing up until
occurrence of subpat and its rightmost plausible reoc-
we have matched all of pat (and thus have succeeded
currence and is always greater than or equal to 1. m is
in finding a match), or else we come to a mismatch at
just patlen - ].
some new char after matching the last m characters of
In the case where we have matched the final m
pat.
characters of pat before failing, we clearly wish to shift
In this latter case, we wish to shift pat down to
our attention down string by 1 + m or deltal(char) or
consider the next plausible juxtaposition. Of course,
deltaz(]), according to whichever allows the largest
we would like to shift it as far down as possible.
shift. From the definition of deltae as k + m where k is
Observation 3(a). We can use the same reasoning
always greater than or equal to 1, it is clear that delta2
described above-based on the mismatched character
is at least as large as 1 + m. Therefore we can shift
char and deltal-to slide pat down k so as to align the
our attention down string by the maximum of just the
two known occurrences of char. Then we will want to
two deltas. This rule also applies when m --- 0 (i.e.
inspect the character of string aligned with the last
when we have not yet matched any characters of pat),
character of pat. Thus we will actually shift our atten-
because in that case ] = patlen and delta2(]) >- 1.
tion down string by k + m. The distance k we should
slide pat depends on where char occurs in pat. If the
rightmost occurrence of char in pat is to the right of
3. Example
the mismatched character (i.e. within that part of pat
we have already passed) we would have to move pat In the following example we use an "1' " under
backwards to align the two known occurrences of char. string to indicate the current char. When this "pointer"
We would not want to do this. In this case we say that is pushed to the right, imagine that it drags the right
delta~ is "worthless" and slide pat forward by k = 1 end of pat with it (i.e. imagine pat has a hook on its
(which is always sound). This shifts our attention down right end). When the pointer is moved to the left,
string by 1 + m. If the rightmost occurrence of char in keep pat fixed with respect to string.
763 Communications October 1977
of Volume 20
the ACM Number 10
pat: AT-THAT 4. The Algorithm
string: ... WHICH-FINALLY-HALTS.--AT-THAT-POINT ...
÷
We now specify the algorithm. The notation pat(j)
Since "F" is known not to occur in pat, we can appeal refers to the jth character in pat (counting from 1 on
to Observation 1 and move the pointer (and thus pat) the left).
down by 7: We assume the existence of two tables, delta1 and
deltas. The first has as many entries as there are
pat: AT-THAT characters in the alphabet. The entry for some charac-
string:
... WHICH-FINALLY-HALTS.--AT-THAT-POINT ...
÷ ter char will be denoted by deltas(char). The second
table has as many entries as there are character posi-
Appealing to Observation 2, we can move the pointer tions in the pattern. The jth entry will be denoted by
down 4 to align the two hyphens: delta2(j). Both tables contain non-negative integers.
The tables are initialized by preprocessing pat, and
pat:
string: AT-THAT their entries correspond to the values deltaa and delta2
... WHICH-FINALLY-HALTS.--AT-THAT-POINT ...
÷ referred to earlier. We will specify their precise con-
tents after it is clear how they are to be used.
Now char matches its opposite in pat. Therefore we
Our search algorithm may be specified as follows:
step left by one:
stringlen ,,-- length of string.
pat: AT-THAT i ~ patlen.
string: ... WHICH-FINALLY-HALTS.--AT T~IAT POINT ... top: if i > stringlen then return false.
÷ j ,,-- patlen.
loop: ifj = 0 then returnJ + 1.
Appealing to Observation 3(a), we can move the if string(i) = pat(j)
pointer to the right by 7 positions because "L" does then
j~"-j-1.
not occur in pat. 2 Note that this only moves pat to the
i,~--i-1.
right by 6. goto loop.
close;
pat: AT-THAT i ~-- i + max(delta1 (string(i)), delta2 (j)).
string: ... WHICH-FINALLY-HALTS.--AT-THAT-POINT ... goto top.
÷
If the above algorithm returns false, then pat does not
Again char matches the last character of pat. Stepping occur in string. If the algorithm returns a number,
to the left we see that the previous character in string
then it is the position of the left end of the first
also matches its opposite in pat. Stepping to the left a
occurrence of pat in string.
second time produces: The deltal table has an entry for each character
char in the alphabet. The definition of delta~ is:
pat: AT-THAT
string: ... WHICH-FINALLY-HALTS.--AT-THAT-POINT ... deltas(char) = If char does not occur in pat, then pat-
÷ len; else patlen - j, where j is the
Noting that we have a mismatch, we appeal to Obser- maximum integer such that pat(j) =
vation 3(b). The delta2 move is best since it allows us char.
to push the pointer to the right by 7 so as to align the The deltaz table has one entry for each of the integers
discovered substring "AT" with the beginning of pat. ~ from 1 to patlen. Roughly speaking, delta2(j) is (a) the
distance we can slide pat down so as to align the
pat: AT-THAT discovered occurrence (in string) of the last patlen-j
string: ... WHICH-FINALLY-HALTS.--AT-THAT-POINT ...
÷ characters of pat with its rightmost plausible reoccurr-
ence, plus (b) the additional distance we must slide the
This time we discover that each character of pat "pointer" down so as to restart the process at the right
matches the corresponding character in string so we end of pat. To define delta2 precisely we must define
have found the pattern. Note that we made only 14 the rightmost plausible reoccurrence of a terminal
references to string. Seven of these were required to substring of pat. To this end let us make the following
confirm the final match. The other seven allowed us to conventions: Let $ be a character that does not occur
move past the first 22 characters of string. in pat and let us say that if i is less than 1 then pat(i) is
$. Let us also say that two sequences of characters [c~
• . . c,] and [d~ . . . d,] "unify" if for all i from 1 to n
either c~ =di or c~ = $ or d~ = $.
2 Note that deltaz would allow us to move the pointer to the
right only 4 positions in order to align the discovered substring "T" Finally, we define the position of the rightmost
in string with its second from last occurrence at the beginning of the plausible reoccurrence of the terminal substring which
word "THAT" in pat. starts at positionj + 1, rpr(j), forj from 1 topatlen, to
3 The delta~ move only allows the pointer to be pushed to the
right by 4 to align the hyphens. be the greatest k less than or equal to patlen such that
764 Communications October 1977
of Volume 20
the ACM Number 10
[pat(j + 1) ... pat(patlen)] and [pat(k) ... pat(k + Of course we do not actually have two versions of
patlen - j - 1)] unify and either k -< 1 or pat(k - 1) :~ deltax. Instead we use only deltao, and in place of deltax
pat(]).4 (That is, the position of the rightmost plausible in the max expression we merely use the deltao entry
reoccurrence of the substring subpat, which starts at j unless it is large (in which case we use 0).
+ 1, is the rightmost place where subpat occurs in pat Note that the fast loop just scans down string,
and is not preceded by the character pat(j) which effectively looking for the last character pat(patlen) in
precedes its terminal occurrence-with suitable allow- pat, skipping according to deltax. (delta2 can be ignored
ances for either the reoccurrence or the preceding in this case since no terminal substring has yet been
character to fall beyond the left end of pat. Note that matched, i.e. delta2(patlen) is always less than or equal
rpr(j) may be negative because of these allowances.) to the corresponding delta1.) Control leaves this loop
Thus the distance we must slide pat to align the only when i exceeds stringlen. The test at undo decides
discovered substring which starts at j + 1 with its whether this situation arose because all of string has
rightmost plausible reoccurrence is j + 1 - rpr(j). The been scanned or because pat(patlen) was hit (which
distance we must move to get back to the end of pat is caused i to be incremented by large). If the first case
just patlen - j. delta2(j) is just the sum of these two. obtains, pat does not occur in string and the algorithm
Thus we define delta2 as follows: returns false. If the second case obtains, then i is
restored (by subtracting large) and we enter the slow
delta2(j) = patlen + 1 - rpr(j).
loop which backs up checking for matches. When a
To make this definition clear, consider the following mismatch is found we skip ahead by the maximum of
two examples: the original delta1 and delta2 and reenter the fast loop.
We estimate that 80 percent of the time spent in
j: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
searching is spent in the fast loop.
pat: A B C X X X A B C
The fast loop can be coded in four machine instruc-
delta2(J):_ 14 13 12 11 10 9 11 10 1
tions:
fast: char ~--string(i).
j: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 i *-i + deltao(char).
pat: skip the next instruction if i > stringlen.
A B Y X C D E Y X
delta2(J):_ goto fast.
17 16 15 14 13 12 7 10 1
undo: . . .
We have implemented this algorithm in PDP-10 assem-
5. Implementation Considerations
bly language. In our implementation we have reduced
the number of instructions in the fast loop to three by
The most frequently executed part of the algorithm
translating i down by stringlen; we can then test i
is the code that embodies Observations 1 and 2. The
against 0 and conditionally jump to fast in one instruc-
following version of our algorithm is equivalent to the
tion.
original version provided that deltao is a table contain-
On a byte addressable machine it is easy to imple-
ing the same entries as delta1 except that
ment "char ~--string(i)" and "i ~--i + deltao(char)" in
deltao(pat(patlen)) is set to an integer large which is
one instruction each. Since our implementation was in
greater than stringlen + patlen (while deltal(pat(patlen))
PDP-10 assembly language we had to employ byte
is always 0).
pointers to access characters in string. The PDP-10
stringlen ,:-- length of string. instruction set provides an instruction for incrementing
i ~-- patlen.
a byte pointer by one but not by other amounts. Our
if i > stringlen then return false.
code therefore employs an array of 200 indexing byte
fast: i ,--- i + delta0(string(i)).
if i <- stringlen then goto fast. pointers which we use to access characters in string in
undo: if i <- large then return false. one indexed instruction (after computing the index) at
i ~-- (i - large) - 1. the cost of a small (five-instruction) overhead every
j ~-- patlen - 1.
200 characters. It should be noted that this trick only
slow: ifj = 0then returni + 1.
makes up for the lack of direct byte addressing; one
if string(i) = pat(j)
then can expect our algorithm to run somewhat faster on a
j*.-j-1. byte-addressable machine.
i*-.-i-1.
goto slow.
close; 6. Empirical Evidence
i ,~- i + max(deltal(string(i)), deltaz(j)).
goto fast.
We have exhaustively tested the above PDP-10
implementation on random test data. To gather the
4 Note that whenj = patlen, the two sequences [pat(patlen + 1)
test patterns we wrote a program which randomly
• . . pat(patlen)] and [pat(k). i • pat(k - 1)] are empty and therefore
unify. Thus, rpr(paden) is simply the greatest k less than or equal to selects a substring of a given length from a source
patlen such that k <- 1 or pat(k - 1) ~ pat(patlen). string. We used this program to select 300 patterns of
765 Communications October 1977
of Volume 20
the ACM Number 10
length patlen, for each patlen from 1 to 14. We then Fig. 1.
used our algorithm to search for each of the test 1.0 -
patterns in its source string, starting each search in a
EMPIRICAL CO~T
random position somewhere in the first half of the
0.9
source string. All of the characters for both the patterns
and the strings were in primary memory (rather than a
secondary storage medium such as a disk). 0.8
We measured the cost of each search in two ways:
the number of references made to string and the total
number of machine instructions that actually got exe- ~~ 07
cuted (ignoring the preprocessing to set up the two
tables). ~ o.e
By dividing the number of references to string by i
the number of characters i - 1 passed before the ~ o.s
pattern was found (or string was exhausted), we ob- -~ i
tained the number of references to string per character
passed. This measure is independent of the particular ~ 0.,
implementation of the algorithm. By dividing the num-
ber of instructions executed by i - 1, we obtained the
average number of instructions spent on each character ~ 03 -
passed. This measure depends upon the implementa-
tion, but we feel that it is meaningful since the imple- 0.2 -
mentation is a straightforward encoding of the algo-
rithm as described in the last section.
We then averaged these measures across all 300 0.1-
samples for each pattern length.
Because the performance of the algorithm depends o _
upon the statistical properties of pat and string (and o 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
LENGTH OF PATTERN
hence upon the properties of the source string from
which the test patterns were obtained), we performed Fig. 2
this experiment for three different kinds of source 7
I I I I I I I I I I I I [
strings, each of length 10,000. The first source string
EMPIRICAL COST
consisted of a random sequence of O's and l's. The 6
second source string was a piece of English text ob-
tained from an online manual. The third source string
was a random sequence of characters from a 100- ~
character alphabet.
In Figure 1 the average number of references to ~ ,
string per character in string passed is plotted against
3.56
the pattern length for each of three source strings.
Note that the number of references to string per o 3
character passed is less than 1. For example, for an ~_
English pattern of length 5, the algorithm typically -~
inspects 0.24 characters for every character passed.
That is, for every reference to string the algorithm
passes about 4 characters, or, equivalently, the algo- 1
rithm inspects only about a quarter of the characters it I O.473
0.266
passes when searching for a pattern of length 5 in an °o I I I I i ] ] [ I I I [ I
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
English text string. Furthermore, the number of refer- LENGTH OF PATTERN
ences per character drops as the patterns get longer.
This evidence supports the conclusion that the algo- In Figure 2 the average number of instructions
rithm is "sublinear" in the number of references to executed per character passed is plotted against the
string. pattern length. The most obvious feature to note is
For comparison, it should be noted that the Knuth, that the search speeds up as the patterns get longer.
Morris, and Pratt algorithm references string precisely That is, the total number of instructions executed in
1 time per character passed. The simple search algo- order to pass over a character decreases as the length
rithm references string about 1.1 times per character of the pattern increases.
passed (determined empirically with the English sam- Figure 2 also exhibits a second interesting feature
ple above). of our implementation of the algorithm: For sufficiently
766 Communications October 1977
of Volume 20
the ACM Number 10
large alphabets and sufficiently long patterns the algo- delta1 in a linear scan through the pattern. Thus our
rithm executes fewer than 1 instruction per character preprocessing for delta1 is linear in patlen plus the size
passed. For example, in the English sample, less than of the alphabet.
1 instruction per character is executed for patterns of At a slight loss of efficiency in the search speed
length 5 or more. Thus this implementation is "sub- one could eliminate the initialization of the deltal
linear" in the sense that it executes fewer than i + array by storing with each entry a key indicating the
patlen instructions before finding the pattern at i. This number of times the algorithm has previously been
means that no algorithm which references each char- called. This approach still requires initializing the array
acter it passes could possibly be faster than ours in the first time the algorithm is used.
these cases (assuming it takes at least one instruction To implement our algorithm for extremely large
to reference each character). alphabets, one might implement the deltal table as a
The best alternative algorithm for finding a single hash array. In the worst case, accessing delta~ during
substring is that of Knuth, Morris, and Pratt. If that the search itself could require order patlen instruc-
algorithm is implemented in the extraordinarily effi- tions, significantly impairing the speed of the algo-
cient way described in [4, pp. 11-12] and [2, Item rithm. Hence the algorithm as it stands almost certainly
179]) then the cost of looking at a character can be does not run in time linear in i + patlen for infinite
expected to be at least 3 - p instructions, where p is alphabets.
the probability that a character just fetched from string Knuth, in analyzing the algorithm, has shown that
is equal to a given character of pat. Hence a horizontal it still runs in linear time when deltaa is omitted, and
line at 3 - p instructions/character represents the best this result holds for infinite alphabets. Doing this,
(and, practically, the worst) the Knuth, Morris, and however, will drastically degrade the performance of
Pratt algorithm can achieve. the algorithm on the average. In [5] Knuth exhibits an
The simple string searching algorithm (when coded algorithm for setting up delta2 in time linear in patlen.
with a 3-instruction fast loop 6) executes about 3.3 From the preceding empirical evidence, the reader
instructions per character (determined empirically on can conclude that the algorithm is quite good in the
the English sample above). average case. However, the question of its behavior in
As noted, the preprocessing time for our algorithm the worst case is nontrivial. Knuth has recently shed
(and for Knuth, Morris, and Pratt) has been ignored. some light on this question. In [5] he proves that the
The cost of this preprocessing can be made linear in execution of the algorithm (after preprocessing) is
patlen (this is discussed further in the next section) and linear in i + patlen, assuming the availability of array
is trivial compared to a reasonably long search. We space linear in patlen plus the size of the alphabet. In
made no attempt to code this preprocessing efficiently. particular, he shows that in order to discover that pat
However, the average cost (in our implementation) does not occur in the first i characters of string, at
ranges from 160 instructions (for strings of length 1) most 6 * i characters from string are matched with
to about 500 instructions (for strings of length 14). It characters in pat. He goes on to say that the constant 6
should be explained that our code uses a block transfer is probably much too large, and invites the reader to
instruction to clear the 128-word delta~ table at the improve the theorem. His proof reveals that the linear-
beginning of 
...[文档已截断]
